# Incident Response Report

## Summary
- **Severity:** **High Severity:** Significant impact, needs prompt attention.
- **Priority:** **P2 - High Priority:** Needs swift resolution. Significant business impact.
- **Asset(s) Affected:** End-user workstations, email system, network
- **Incident Owner:** Vinicio Morillo
- **Contact Information:** vam201@ensign.edu, Tel. 385-295-0509
- **Incident Start Time:** 11/12/2024 19:42 PM
- **Incident Close Time:** 11/12/2024 20:00 PM
## Incident Timeline

On 11/12/2024 at 19:42 PM, the user received a document via email called “PhishingAttachment.xlsm”, which was downloaded and copied to the downloads folder. Then, when opening the document, a code established a two-way communication to an unknown IP address, indicating that a C2 connection was created or to download or take control of the computer in the future.

At 19:45 pm, the attacker downloaded an executable named a.exe onto the computer, which contained a renamed version of a legitimate system tool designed to hide legitimate system processes.

20:00 pm, An ISO image was mounted on the system and this tool began to run and was saved so that it would run every time the operating system was started. This launched a script to execute another program, which gave the attacker permanent access to the system and allowed it to continue escalating to other systems within the network.
## Triage and Analysis

- The incident is based on a phishing attack sent to the user via email as a file from a provider. When downloading this file and trying to open it, the malware was secretly executed, which allowed the attacker indefinite access to continue escalating in the network and to other company resources.

- When the user's computer sends the logs to SIEM, the events are immediately detected by security analysts. Both the mail server and the SIEM, upon receiving the alert of scripts running on this device and the network monitor indicating that this connection was being established from this device to an IP, triggered the alert to detect the security breach.

- The user was asked if he knew about this provider and why he opened and downloaded this email. The user indicated that he was familiar with the provider's name, but he needed to read that the domain from which this email was being sent was not the correct domain from which the file was being sent.

- IOCs: Excel/Word document names, `a.exe`, ISO details, external IP.

- Identify the scope and impact: Network and end-user compromise risk, potential spread to other assets.

- Evidence of this attack is found in the quarantine repository, which contains both the downloaded file and a copy of the executable (malware) that was downloaded and the ISO image that was set to continue having access.
## Containment and Neutralization (Short-term/Triage)

- This user account was immediately blocked, and the console line on this device was disabled to prevent further execution of such commands on this workstation. The email recipient, downloaded files, executed processes, and the IP to which the device communicated were all flagged as suspicious and blocked.
## Recovery and Vulnerability Remediation 
- The user's computer was reset to the last known good configuration prior to downloading this email. A thorough investigation was conducted across the company's entire network and other emails to identify if anyone else had been affected by this attack, and other network components were reviewed to verify that this attack had not escalated to compromise these systems with a greater scope of damage.

- The IT and Network departments were notified for action, and other firewall and email server rules were updated. This detailed information was sent to other users throughout the company so that they were aware of what had happened and could be more vigilant.

- Phishing treatment was reactivated for all users in the company's departments so that they remember to mark these emails as phishing before opening them or downloading any files. Also, they can identify emails outside their external contacts' correct domain.

- Finally, the company that they were trying to impersonate was notified so that they could take action regarding the issue of their email domain being impersonated.

## Hardening and Detection Improvements (Lessons Learned, Long-term Response)
- Long-term mitigation and preventive measures.
	- Lessons learned: Update detection for phishing and malicious macro activities, enhance email filtering, and add IP and file hash blocklists.
- Improvements to detection systems and processes.
	- Configure SIEM to flag command prompt and abnormal document activity.

---
